---
layout: post
title:  "Mimima Residual Disease In Cancer"
date:   2025-12-10 10:13:50 -0500
description: "MRD in cancer, where we are and current trends"
tags: [MRD, liquid_biopsy]
---

# Minimum Residual Disease, what is it and how do we approach it

### What is minimal residual disease?

Put simply, minimal residual disease (MRD) is disease, namely cancer, that has been treated and appears to be cleared, but still exists. Lets consider a patient who has small cell lung cancer (SCLC). These tumors are characterized by the presence of TP53 and RB1 mutations, in standard of care they are typically treated with a platinum based therapy, a form of chemotherapy which introduces double-strand breaks in DNA. Because the tumor cells divide faster, they are impacted more severely, and typically will respond to treatment, at least initially. However to truely cure cancer you need to eliminate all the cells, and this is the problem, doing so is extemely hard. There are a couple of reasons for this, I will briefly mention one, most cancers are not a homogenous collections of cells. They are dividing rapidly, and so evolving and diverging from their parent lineage rapidly as well. This is something well characterized and known as tumor clonality. This is an interesting topic in itself and perhaps a topic of a future post, however the point i'm making is that tumor clonality can lead to subclones of a tumor that can lead to treatment resistance. This is one of the reasons it is so important to catch cancer early, the heterogenous or diverse a tumor is the more difficult it is to treat succesfully. This was a bit of a long winded tangent to say that even if a cancer appears to be cleared through imaging, that does not mean it is gone, some of those tumor cells could remain and continue to grow. Going back to our case, that is commonly the case, these patients will often appear to have been treated succesfully, but molecularly those tumor cells still exist, and so eventually the cancer will return, often alarmingly fast, and poor outcomes will follow.

Why are we developing MRD assays?

Now that we have a basic understanding of what MRD is conceptually we must ask ourselves why do we care? The answer simply speaking, is that if we know the cancer is still around, we can extend treatment and even try different treatment approaches in the hopes of producing a lasting response. Remember the less opportunity a tumor has to evolve, the better the patient outcomes will generally be. With succesfull MRD assays we are talking about getting a jump on cancer weeks to months ahead of traditional imaging such as a ct-scan. Additionally molecular based assays are more accessible to patient populations, not everyone is within a convenient distance to a site with imaging equipment potentially delaying detection.

Why ctDNA is an attractive target for MRD assays?

We've discussed what MRD is and why we should care, the next obvious question is how does it work? From what I am familiar with and aware of most MRD assays are based off of a liquid biopsy. A blood draw is taken, often in a streck or edta tube, and molecularly assessed. That is not to say other alternatives might not be viable, we will discuss a few in the next sections, however most rely on circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA). The primary reason for this is the necessary detection threshold to be usefull. We are talking about capturing extremely low signal in often noisy data. In a liquid biopsy this often means capturing a signal on the order of .1%, and an order of magnitude lower would be even better. A ctDNA liquid biopsy hits a trifecta, it is accessible, it has a relatively low cost, it is scalable, all while getting close to usefull limit of detection and limit of blank thresholds.

Key MRD approaches, strengths and weaknesses

Tissue Informed Methodolgies

Many leading MRD approaches are tissue informed, which delves into the realm of personalized medicine a bit. The basic concept is that you have sequenced a piece of the tumor tissue itself, having that piece you then know which somatic variants characterize the tumor, which are founding variants (theoretically in all evolutionary divergences of the tumor), and as such you know exactly where in the genome you need to look for and MRD signal. Having this information you can then build a custom capture panel targeting those variants and sequence to great depth, on the order of 1,000-10,000X. Often this is done in conjunction with unique molecular identifiers (UMI's), that is to say a UMI is tagged on each molecule so that when a molecule is sequenced more than once a consensus sequence can be generated, effecitvely reducing the probability a sequenceing error will be counted as a somatic variant. This may seem like overkill at first glance, but remember, we are trying to find extremely low signal in what is often noisy data, anything that can boost signal or reduce noise makes for a better assay. The advantage in these approaches are a very high assay sensitvity, the problem as one might imagine, is that having knowledge of the tumor beforehand is at best more costly and requires time to analyze/build a custom panel. Perhaps more of weakness though is the fact that tumor tissue is required, this is not always possible and is at best requires an invasive biopsy beforehand.

Tumor Agnostic Methodolgies

While i would consider tissue informed methodologies to be the current gold standard in terms of sensitivity, as discussed there are limitations with such approaches. Fortunately there are some creative approaches to MRD using ctDNA without the need for an apriori knowledge of the tumor tissue. Let's discuss a few of these now

Variant Based MRD

Just because we don't have apriori expectations of somatic mutations from a personalized panel doesn't mean we can't use variants, their use just becomes more challenging. Tumors can often be characterized by hotspot mutations based on their type. I briefly mentioned TP53 and RB1 mutations being characteristic of SCLC, likewise many colorectal cancers (CRC) have hotspot mutations in KRAS, NRAS, and BRAF genes. The distinction here is that we don't know exactly where to look for these variants, we simply have an aproximate idea. Furthermore because we don't know the ground truth we are more prone to detecting artifacts that are not truely somatic, especially at the low detection threshold we are discussing around MRD. I'll give an example, let's consider a CRC case which we have sequenced and detected low level variants in the kras gene. Most sequencing in the context is PCR based, in other words during library prep molecules are replicated in order to be able to sequence more material. This is done many times, however a PCR amplification is not 100% perfect, mistakes will happen and a base will be switched seemingly looking like a variant. UMI's can aid in accounting for this phenomenom, reducing the noise, in effect a UMI is tagged to each molecule before PCR, then unless the replication error happened in the first few PCR cycles, a consensus sequence can be reconstructed from the UMI's. False variants can also occur due to simple sequencing errors, sequencers are very good but not perfect, and given that we are talking millions of dna fragments, occasionally a sequencer might read a A when it's really a T. There is an approach to address this as well however known as duplex sequencing. DNA is double stranded, a true variant should exist on both the forward and reverse strands, in duplex sequencing the forward and reverse strands are paired and so we know that if a variant exists on one strand and not the other something is amiss. We've discussed two sources of technical artifacts, but biology is not so simple, we would be remiss if we did not at least mention CHIP variants (Clonal Hematopoiesis of Indeterminate Potential). As we age we aquire mutations, these occur at low levels, but are not necessarily related to the cancer at all. They originate in hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) in the blood, but because we are sequencing blood to detect ctDNA we pick them up as well. Fortunately there is a way to account for them, the buffy coat in a liquid biopsy is full of HSC's, if the buffy coat is sequenced as well the CHIP variants can largely be accounted for and black-listed in the MRD assay, albeit this is a seperate sequencing library and so there are time and cost commitments to address this. I will end our variant based MRD discussion with a note on phased variants. In all of these approaches we are trying to do two things, reduce noise or increase signal, it is as simple as that, there are just underlying costs associated. Examining phased variants, that is to say variants which are close enough to be sequenced together, and are on the same strand are in cis. The liklihood of a sequencing artifact occuring one after the other is low, so looking for phased variants is yet another way to boost signal.

Copy Number and LOH MRD

In the conext of MRD another place to look for signal outside of the traditional variants are aneuploidy based. Cancers can get messy, they may have a deletion of an entire chromosome arm in one region, massive focal amplifications in other areas. They may even have copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity (LOH) events where there was a deletion, however the remaining chromsome arm was then amplified bringing everything back to a diploid state. These types of events are argubably easier to detect, as overall signal is not concentrated at a single base-pair, but rather spread out across a more diverse region of the genome so there is less noise. However that signal is spread out and so it's sensitivity is generally not as high. As an example, ichorCNA is a publicly available tool for estimating ctDNA using tumor aneuploidy from low coverage whole genome sequencing (WGS). I will not go into as much detail here other than to say the signal/noise ratio is important in all methods, a source of technical variation here for example is GC bias which needs to be accounted for. The point I am making is that cancer signal does exist outside of purely somatic variants.

Fragmentome MRD

I do want to touch on fragmentomics as well, as I would consider it, at current, the third main feature when talking about MRD in liquid biopsy. I will lead by saying fragment sizes in a liquid biopsy are not consistent between normal DNA and tumor derived DNA. Particularly tumors have a bias twoards shorter dna fragment sizes, and this is signal that is detectable in ctDNA. Additionally as part of the fragmentome umbrella, cancer derived fragments often have distinct end motifs due to the altered nuclease activity of DNASE1 for example. Finally I will touch on nucleosome depletion and nuclesome depleted regions. Looking at a ctDNA, and specifically at transcription factor binding sites (TFBS), transcription start sites (TSS), and the 1st exon/intron junction of genes, we can often observe drops in coverage. Why does this occur? The answer is that when DNA is would around the nucleosomes it is protected from degradation in the blood, however when a cancer unwound at a specific site for some reason, i.e. to express a gene, that DNA is no longer as protected. This appears as dips in coverage at specific sites because the DNA there, specific to the tumor, as been degrades so much that it is no longer sequenced or mapped. In effect this creates somewhat of an analog to RNA expression, and a unique fingerprint to detect. As with everything however there are tradeoffs to all approaches. Speaking specifically to fragmentomics WGS is required, as such the tradeoff is sequencing depth vs cost.

Upcoming or Alternative Technologies

I want to briefly mention some alternative technologies and avenues of exploration. Detection of cancers in a MRD setting is not necessarily limited to ctDNA, though that is where the focus is right now. For example extracellular vesicles are released by cancer cells and can act as a biomarker for cancer as those EVs contain cancer specific DNA/RNA/proteins. They can be isolated through microfluidic devices, however at current such approaches are not scalable presenting challenges. Something else to mention, which I find fascinating, is to not look specifically for tumor signal, but rather look for something tumor adjacent. I'm referring to the immune system itself, even if the immune system cannot handle the cancer, it should still know it's there and be responsive to it. Therefore if we get to a point where we can predict t-cell receptor clonotypes for specific MHC/Neoantigen complexes we may be able to infer MRD from the TCR clonotype repetoire itself.

Final Thoughts

At the end of the day, in the context of MRD, everything comes down to this:

1. How can we boost signal
2. How can we reduce noise

It sounds simple in theory, however I hope i've left you with the impression that in practice it is far more complex. My beleif is that multi-omic assays are the next step, and will provide the most promissing results. Combining variants, with aneuploidy, structural variants, fragmentome based features, and other emerging technologies may bring assay sensitivity down enough to become mainstream, ultimately improving patient outomes. Indeed I think we may be on the cusp of this already.








